is the next video in my series of short
talks about astronomical objects and
we're going to concentrate today ops
giants the planets Uranus and Neptune
out there in the outer reaches of the
solar system so to begin with ancient
peoples knew of the planets that they
could see with the naked eye Mercury
Venus Mars Jupiter and Saturn and beyond
Saturn the outermost of these planets
they thought the was the realm of the
fixed stars and of course it took the
revolution of Copernicus to put the Sun
in the center of that rather than the
earth and Newton to explain gravity was
responsible for all of these individual
planets orbiting around the Sun or in
the case of the moons of the planets
orbiting around their parents now this
is Sir William Herschel in a picture of
his 40-foot telescope yes his telescopes
were named not by the diameter of the
mirror but by the length of the tube and
this was a very large instrument mounted
on a turntable but he made here is you
can see this in the Whipple Museum in
Cambridge or at least a copy of it and
the story goes that in March of 1781 he
was in his back garden in bath and he
was observing looking for double stars
and comets and he saw in the
constellation of Taurus an object that
appeared to be not a star all stars
looked round no matter what the
magnification you use upon them they
still a point of light but this
particular object looked like a diffuse
fuzzy object and therefore couldn't be a
star so he initially thought it was a
comet and realized that as he increased
the magnification up to the fantastic
powers of that are quoted on the page
here and four hundred nine hundred times
even that the disc of this object got
larger so he realized that he definitely
found something and reported it to the
Royal Astronomical Society
and after a while they tracked the orbit
and discovered that it was moving in an
elliptical orbit around the Sun that was
fairly nearly circular not the long thin
nearly parabolic orbits that comets do
where they rush into the solar system
and then disappear back out again
crossing the orbits rather all the other
planets eventually therefore they
realized he had discovered a planet and
was the first person to do so since the
invention of the telescope nowadays we
call the planet Uranus and there was a
long debate about this Herschel himself
tried to name it Giorgio Sidious naming
it after King George because I think he
wanted to be appointed royal astronomer
but the French didn't like that very
much they suggested calling it Herschel
but eventually Uranus the father of
Saturn came to be the name and that's
that makes sense because it's the next
planet out beyond Saturn a curious
object though because we've discovered
that it has a faint system of rings
around it and that it's tipped right
over at 97 degrees so more than a right
angle of tilt compared to the plane in
which it's orbiting around the Sun you
can see the tilt of the four major outer
planets there in the graphic at the
bottom right jupiter almost straight up
and down saturn tilted at about 25
degrees and the outer planets there the
ice giants Uranus 97 so tipped right
over and a fairly significant but
sensible tilt for Neptune as well there
now this means that the seasons on
Uranus must be particularly crazy
because if you can imagine it orbiting
around the Sun sometimes the direction
of the spin axis is pointing almost
straight at the Sun other times it's
pointing at right angles to it so you
can imagine that for half the year one
half of the
would see the Sun and the other will be
in total darkness and then at the other
times of the year you'll get more or
less normal daylight nighttime as the
planet spins around there's a nice few
little graphics of it here again showing
us a few clouds on the surface of the
pale Bluegreen disk and those rings that
are just about imageable from Hubble
Space Telescope here and indeed a few of
the moons of Uranus there that been
picked up it has five that were easily
detectable and lots more of a tiny
moonlit rough potato shaped objects that
are being discovered more and more are
though as time goes on look at the
internals of Uranus we find that there
is a rocky metal core very similar in
structure perhaps to the what we have
for the earth or the inner planets but
then it's overlain by a vast amount of
material in the form of water and
ammonia and methane and an outer
envelope comprising hydrogen and methane
and helium right out there at the top
and that's why we call that the these
planets Uranus and the next one Neptune
ice giants because the mantle is made of
these Isis and is frozen up water frozen
up ammonia and methane but fairly low
temperatures hasn't a very interesting
collection of moons this is Miranda only
470 kilometers across and that makes it
just about large enough for itself
gravity to have pulled it into a round
body that's the most efficient way of
packing material together under gravity
is to put it all into a sphere into a
ball shape but for that to happen the
amount of gravity has to exceed the
strength of whatever the object is made
up of in this case mostly ice and so
make the ice become plastic and float to
that minimum energy shape but look down
at the bottom there you can see some
amazing they're ice Chevron and some
really large cliffs down at the bottom
of the object there if you jumped off
one of those cliffs the weak gravity of
this object would slowly pull you down
he tell you 15 minutes to fall the two
kilometers this is the next moon a
little bit larger 1,200 kilometers
aerial and Voyager 2 only approached
this within a hundred and thirty
thousand kilometers so it's got a
reasonable picture showing some cracks
and grooves across the surface that look
perhaps like some of the ices have been
moving and so evidence of activity and
evidence of activity on these icy moons
often results in us turning her to find
that there's a liquid ocean trapped
underneath the ice crust we're not sure
for Ariel we didn't approach it closely
enough to be able to make the
measurements of any Umbriel very dark
colored moon they really had to wind the
gain on the camera up to get this image
tall twelve hundred kilometers across
and again we didn't pass it very closely
so rather difficult to see the structure
but there's this very curious bright
ring up at the top there now that isn't
the pole of the moon that's actually on
the equator it's just the orientation of
the photograph so again I saw something
leaking from any in a body of liquid we
just don't know at this point
marnya here again we didn't get a
particularly close view of Teutonia
500,000 kilometers and 1600 kilometer
diameter moon so reasonable size mixture
of grey craters and some evidence of an
active surface it's not got as many
craters as it might have if it had been
a purely dead object with no geology and
movement of the surface Bron this is
1,500 kilometers and is the the largest
of those five moons and again 660
thousand kilometers away when we took
this photograph from Voyager 2 so not
particularly high resolution another
mission to Uranus would be an excellent
thing and being able to go and expect
these moons much more closely but there
are some intriguing dark carbon-rich
deposits in the centre those darker
regions that appear to have come up from
the centre or parts of some large
craters so well worth investigating
there if we ever get the chance now this
free of the discovery of these planets
goes that there were problems predicting
the future position of Uranus whenever
they tried to use Newton's laws of
gravity to plot its orbit and work out
where it was going to move to next the
planet would behave for a very short
time and then wander off and this was
most intriguing one a young man who is
the pictured in the top left there Jon
couch Adams of Cambridge was wandering
in the bookshops of the streets of
Cambridge and came across a book which
talked about problems in modern
astronomy and highlighted the affair
with Uranus is an orbit not being
subject to calculation and suggested
that perhaps there was an outer planet
as yet unknown pulling on it with its
gravity that would be distorting the
orbit and maybe that was the explanation
as Adams was intrigued by this and set
about trying to back calculate where
such a planet might be and how it how
big it had to be in order to do that and
it's a very complicated calculation when
you have to take into account the
gravitational effect not just of the Sun
but of Jupiter and Saturn and Uranus and
this as yet unknown planet and figure it
all out
all with hand calculations the same idea
independently occurred to a gentleman in
Paris called urbane levare who was very
famous astronomer and at the Institute
in Paris and he had the same idea and
also set about doing a calculation at
the same time
now Adams sent his calculations to
Cambridge via the Royal Observatory at
Greenwich took a long time before
anybody took him seriously and he had to
press quite hard but eventually a search
was organized whereas the very ACE in
his calculations over to the Berlin
Observatory and they took them seriously
immediately went out on the very first
night made an observation and they
discovered that there was a small blue
dot at that point now here's the
predictions that Adams and the very a
were making so you can see at the top
here we have Adam has made a number of
different calculations to each marked on
here with these blue dots the various
prediction with here where the purple
square is and the disk where the little
triangle marks it now look at her but if
you plot it on our orbit and she was
actually found and where he had assumed
it might be you can see just how close
in making their predictions they had
slightly larger orbits for it which both
were based on using the apparent pattern
in the orbits called the tightest bode
law which seems to give a
numerical sequence to the distance for
the other planets and even for Uranus
that fitted into that pattern when it
was discovered so they assumed that the
next logical place to put a planet would
be the next place in that sequence but
Neptune wasn't quite that far out so
they there were a couple of things wrong
there but as I said he was sent to the
Berlin observatory picture of it here
and the very first night they went out
with a star map of the area and found it
Adams his predictions have been searched
for in Cambridge this is the
Northumberland telescope in Cambridge
that was used for it
they started several months earlier than
the laverra's prediction had been put
into action but they were in the process
of mapping the entire area rather than
just having a look for one prediction
and indeed the data that we have in the
library there shows annotated maps with
a small blue disk being spotted a couple
of times but nobody reported it so sadly
Cambridge were scooped and they could
have this new planet now often when you
discover something new you can look back
and look at a pre covery reports of it
and doing this we go back and discover
that Sir John Herschel the son of
William had discovered Uranus had in
fact spotted Neptune on 14th of July
1830 he'd seen a small blue disc but he
hadn't reported it so again perhaps we
shouldn't be too unhappy about being
scooped us you've always got to look for
Galileo in these things and it turns out
that this is a page from Galileo's
notebook and he spotted a small blue
star they noted that it appeared to have
changed position between 28th of
December and the 27th of January the
next year there and of course that was
absolutely perfectly the right
coordinates where Neptune would have
been
so I think we can really state that
Galileo was the first person to truly
discover it so this looks like with the
Voyager to fly by with those lovely
clouds this hugely deep blue color and
we've got the great dark spot there and
the SCOOTER down towards the bottom
here's a close-up of the great dark spot
it's like the Great Red Spot on Jupiter
it's a giant storm a hurricane swirling
winds Neptune has some of the fastest
winds it's 1,100 km/h is the Great Red
Spot and the cloud they called the
SCOOTER and the lesser dark spot at the
bottom there and again some ice clouds
in the high atmosphere of Uranus that
not Uranus Neptune it's the internal
structure of Neptune very similar to
Uranus and again we have a rocky core
perhaps a little bit larger than the
planet Earth and then that mantle of
water ammonia and methane ices before an
outer envelope of hydrogen helium and
other gases and it's the mixture of
gases that gives these two planets
they're slightly different bluey green
and blue colors here are they high
clouds imaged by Voyager 2 in the
atmosphere of Neptune just casting
shadows in silhouette they're quite a
nice photograph those ice clouds high in
the atmosphere and here are some images
of the changing weather patterns over a
few years taken from the Hubble Space
Telescope all the way from Earth so we
can see how the white clouds and the
spots and the bands are moving and
changing all the time on this very
active atmosphere but the star of show
out here wasn't June I think as Triton
is the surface of Triton with the rim
wrinkled cantaloupe terrain at the top
and one or two grooves running across it
and then the lower hemisphere there is
covered in what looks like pink snow and
ice with lots of little dark spots on
and those dark spots
when you realize they're all actually
little streaks pointing down the same
direction around in the downwind
direction through the thin nitrogen
atmosphere of this fairly sizable almost
planet sized moon in its own right so
what we think it's happening is that
heat from the Sun is getting trapped
under a clear glass like layer of frozen
nitrogen on the surface and that acts as
a same way as glass in a greenhouse
traps the heat until eventually the
frozen nitrogen melts and then vaporizes
and bursts up through and creates these
enormous nitrogen ice geezers up into
the atmosphere carrying with it a lot of
dirt and dirty material that which then
deposits downwind so the picture on the
left there is an artist's impression
with the shadow being the dark streak
we're seeing of these active geezers but
on the right they're a couple of images
taken looking back towards the Sun at
Triton and you can see in the thin
atmosphere a couple of plumes on the
edge of the image of the planet there
which are the damn wind plumes Triton is
actually quite an interesting world
because 2,700 kilometers across makes it
slightly larger than the planet Pluto
Triton at the top there Pluto at the
bottom taken by the new Horizons probe
but they're very similar from the point
of view of density and chemistry and
Composition they both have these active
surfaces that look like they've not been
around in terms of picking up lots of
craters for more than about 50 million
years there are so few craters that have
survived all the others have been rubbed
out by the activity on the surface and
it's quite possible that they've got
warm liquid interiors again these ice
worlds all seem to have this structure
of being warm and wet internally which
may be a consequence of radioactive
heating
or tidal effects of having a large
neighbor but nevertheless it's quite a
puzzle to work all of this out so it's
just a couple more shots here there's a
picture looking at Neptune and a few of
its lesser moons that have been
discovered and also marking out the ring
arcs and the rings that have been
detected so again these outer ice giants
both Uranus and Neptune have their own
sets of thin rings and there's a very
small image of the moon Proteus there at
the bottom so there we have it that was
a whistle-stop tour once around the ice
giants Uranus and Neptune I hope you've
enjoyed that and see you for the next
one